# Quotes


## Comics

> The measure of man lies not in what he **says** but in what he **does**. &#x2013; Johnatan KENT


## Fiction

> Si on n&rsquo;est pas prêt à tout, on n&rsquo;est prêt à rien. &#x2013; Paul AUSTER.

> A career is wonderful, but you can&rsquo;t curl up with it on a cold night. &#x2013; Marilyn MONROE


## Science

These quote are attributed to Einstein but I am not convinced.

> You can&rsquo;t blame gravity for falling in love.
> 
> Learn from yesterday, live for today, hope for tomorrow. The important thing is not to stop questioning.
> 
> Try not to become a man of success, but rather try to become a man of value.

These, however, are probably from Einstein.

> Insanity: doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results.
> 
> The true sign of intelligence is not knowledge but imagination.
> 
> The development of general ability for independent thinking and judgment should always be placed foremost. &#x2013; Albert EINSTEIN


## Education

> Everybody is a genius. But if you judge a dolphin by its ability to climb a tree, it will live its whole life believing that it is stupid. &#x2013; Anonymous


## Professional advice

> Do all the useless baggage stuff like writing thank-you emails whenever someone notifies you of an error, respond when it’s fixed, and no matter if they care or not, write a quick one-minute explanation of why the error happened in the first place and how you fixed it. &#x2013; [keypressmonkey](https://medium.com/better-programming/how-to-thrive-as-an-average-programmer-1dd202540ac)


## Life Style

These are inspirational philosophy [but not empirically approved in class room].

> Growth mindset is about meaningful and purposed efforts. &#x2013; Carol DWECK

> Grit is passion and sustained persistence applied toward long-term achievement, with no particular concern for rewards or recognition along the way. &#x2013; Angela DUCKWORTH

There should be a mixed between targeted skills [with clear steps to achieve them] and efforts.

Deliberated practice is the key to mastery.


## Computer Science

> I don&rsquo;t know, I don&rsquo;t want to know. (Rich Hickey)

> In C++ and now in Haskell, we used to say that If it compiles, it is probably correct. It was as true then, as it is now. (Rich Hickey)

> Programmers know the benefits of everything and the tradeoffs of nothing. (Rich Hickey)

-   **tags:** [clj](../decks/clojure.md)


## See also (generated)

-   <../decks/clojure.md>
