# Applied Clojure

## Collections

List (adddition at the head), vectors (addition at the end) and queues
(FIFO).

``` clojure
(def new-orders clojure.lang.PersistentQueue/EMPTY)
```

Use `transient` and `persistent!` if the transformation is local. The
library `medley` from *weavejester* incorporate useful functions.
Collection accessing: use keyword first `(:key m)`, or `(m :key)` if it
is certain that `m` is a map, otherwise if both might be null use
`(get m
  k)`. If possible avoid having a stack of left parentheses such as
`((f)
  x)`. Abuse of `select-keys` to subset a map. If performance is
required, we can create custom collection by defining a type and
implementing the protocol, a custom printing is possible.

Use records and maps to describe your entities. Maps should be the
default choice, unless you decide to use protocols and need performance
for dispatch. Protocols and multimethods are the two ways for
dispatching. Protocols are faster in Clojure, but multimethods are more
flexible.

## Processing Sequential Data.

We can use `map`, `filter`, `reduce` to process sequence of values, but
it might not be efficient. Transducers are created to avoid the
concretion of the data structure.

A transducer (usually denoted by `xf` or `xform`) is a function that
transform a reducing function into an another reducing function. That is
`xf: f -> g` where `f` and `g` have signature `whatever, input ->
  whatever`. Concrete example of reducing function are `conj` with
whatever being a list, `+` (with whatever being a number, and input a
number). See [here](https://clojure.org/reference/transducers) for more
details.

The trick is you can define map, filter and other operations as reducing
function (reducing function are used in `reduce` operations usually). It
is important to note that reducing function can actually grow the
whatever (see `conj`).

We create them by omitting the `coll` argument in the typical sequence
functions, e.g. `(map f)` yields a transducer. Use the `sequence`
function to realize the transducer. The following calls are equal

``` clojure
(= (map #(* 2 %) (range 10))
   (sequence (map #(* 2 %)) (range 10)))
```

If we need eagerness we could use `into`

``` clojure
(into [] (map #(* 2 %)) (range 10))
```

The benefit of transducer is intermediate values are not allocated and
there is a decoupling of the transformations with the reducer (reducing
function and reducible collection). They are also polymorphic. We can
compose transducers and reduction with `transduce`

``` clojure
(def moons-transform
  (comp (filter planet?) (map :moons)))

(defn total-moons [entities]
  (transduce moons-transform + 0 entities))
```

See [understanding
transducers](http://elbenshira.com/blog/understanding-transducers/) for
more details.

Duplicate removal with `distinct` and `dedupe` (only remove subsequent
duplicate and safer for large input). Use `mapcat` instead of `(-> map
  flatten)`.

## Reference, State and Mutation

Identity and state are two distinct notions. An identity is a sequence
of immutable values, and the state is the actual value of an identity at
a certain point of time. The challenge is to always display a single
valid value to all the observer at the same time. There are two types of
successions (mutation): atomic and transactions. An atomic transaction
only cares about the change happening to the identity itself and not
about the coordination of other identity. Transactional ensure that
either all changes or none are performed.

There are two states: program and runtime states. Program state is
concerned with mutation in the problem domain, whereas runtime
facilitate the software's execution (e.g. connections to databases or
network, config files). Runtime state is often unavoidable whereas
program state should be minimized and access through API with curated
methods rather than directly.

For managing change, we should *build just enough* to ensure the
application's needs are met. Every side effect and mutable reference
slows you down.

We should be responsible over our functions (make them pure) and make
choices about what need to be managed. State is a series of snapshots of
values (data) which allows to act responsibly when considering the
presence of observers in other processes. In Clojure, observers have
consistent set of values as of a particular instant thanks to Clojure's
mutable references.

## Use your cores

One of the problem is to send task of the main thread to be completed
asynchronously and retrieve the result (`future` and `promise`).

Tasks and workers for long lived task-oriented concurrency. We can also
use `reducers` and `core.async` (with *channels* and *go blocks*).

For agents, use `send` for computational tasks and won't block for I/O
and `send-off` for updates that might block for an arbitrary time
(thread pool will grow accordingly). The advantage is `agent` can
maintain state compared to `future`.

Use `deref` or `@` for retrieving back the value of a `future` or
`promise`. Promise are used to returns several values from a `future`
block. Use `realized?` to check if a `promise` is available, otherwise
it will block. The `deref` function with an additional argument can
force timeout.

Use Java queues and workers for task oriented programs. This is for
coarse grained task parallelism. `Queues`, `threads` and `executors` are
the tools from Java to perform a queue of incoming work or requests.

For fine-grained parallelism The `pmap` function can be used for easy
parallelism, but the overhead might be consequential. The
`clojure.core.reducer` library is the solution for parallelism
\[fine-grained operations and memory efficient\]. A reducer is
*reducible collection* combined with a *reducing function*. `fold` is
used to perform the reduction \[only vectors and maps can be folded in
parallel, but the serial version can be faster thanks to avoiding
intermediary values\]. A `reducer` splits the data into partition,
reduce the elements and then combine them. The reduce and the combine
functions can hence be different.

Concurrency (design the program as a set of concurrent threads of
execution) we can use `core.async`.

Channels come in unbuffered, fixed buffered, dropping (discard new data)
and sliding buffer (discard old data). Creating a channel is done with
`chan` the function. `nil` can not be passed into channels (as it is the
value for saying the channel is closed). The important operations are
`put` and `take`. A full channel (once the buffer is complete) blocks a
thread if no process other process is the other end of the channel to
`take` the value sent by `put`. Backpressure is the efffect that fixed
sized buffers creates by making the producers block when trying to add
to a full queue. Traditionally channels are used in `go block`.

In the Communicating Sequential Processes (CSP), process belongs to a
thread pool and are *parked* when not blocked by a channel operation
(`>!` or `<!`). `Go blocks` are great for building pipelines of data
transformation.

`core.async/pipelines` gives up the raw performance of fine-grained data
parallelism but yield a more flexible architecture. The function moves
the value from input to output channel with parallel transducer
execution.

Next step is to break a growing system into pieces using concurrency.

## Designing components

Use of channels, better to receive and provide channels for interface.
In `core.async`, a single `go` block is to call the body of the `go`
block *once* asynchronously, while `go-loop` is intended for looping,
unless we close the channel. `go` blocks return a channel, which can be
used for pedestal.

A good design is to split an API layer and implementation layer with a
record.

As for `core.async`, there are three additional concept for channels
that are useful: pipeline, fan-in and fan-out. In a system, pipelines
link an output channel to an input channel (acting like as a conveyor
belt) and can possibly transform its input values with a transducer
(async, sync, blocking). The `pipe` function should be used when no
transformation.

Fan-in channels gather the input of several channels and provide a
single output channel. `merge` is a simple way to merge all the incoming
channels into a single output channels, but it can't be modified after
creation.

The `mix` (for audio mix) function with its functions `admix/unmix`
allows channel to participate in the mix. Users can `toggle` options for
each input channel: `:pause` (no consumption nor inclusion in output
channel), `:mute` (consumption but no inclusion), `:solo` ( if true,
only solo-ed channels in output channel mix, `:pause` and `:mute`
ignored if this is the case).

Fan-out have three ways: `mult`, `pub/sub`, `split`.

The `mult` abstraction is multiply traffic from the input channel into
multiple output channels. Output channels (with different blocking
policy) can participate in the connection with `tap/untap` (if a tap is
closed, it is removed from the `mult`). All the receiving channels must
accept a value from the `mult` before the `mult` can move on to the next
value. This is where alternative buffering strategy are useful.

The `pub/sub` allows to distribute the traffic through a partition
function and subscribers can inform to which partition value they want
to lisen to.

`split` divides the traffic two channels based on a truthiness of a
predicate. `split` is actually a `pub/sub` with a partition function
providing only `truthy/falsy`.

## Compose Your Application

Taking things apart: usualy some portion of the code will work on the
same data, or have the data has a common scope or lifetime, likelihehood
of change from external requirement is similar are resource needed. If
code is reusable when configured differently in more than one context,
then it is a component.

Component should communicate with channels, but in order to set up the
system correctly, we need something to orchestrate it. Several library
exist, the book recommends `Component`, but it has been super-seeded by
[integrant](https://github.com/weavejester/integrant). An example can be
found here
[reitit/integrant](https://github.com/dawran6/reitit/tree/integrant-example/examples/ring-integrant).

Environment variable also should exist with different settings. The
solution in the book are a bit old. Environ still seems to be good on
clojure (jvm).

## Testing

There are three ways to create tests in clojure: repl, example based,
generative testing (properties check).

With REPL driven development, the example used for development are
stored in a file (these are candidates for examples).

For example based, there is the `expectations` library and the following
snippets

``` clojure
(deftest test-range-are
  (testing "Testing range(endIndex)"
    (are [expected endIndex
          (= (range endIndex) expected)
          '(0 1 2 3 4) 5
          '() 0])))
```

Generative testing using

``` clojure
(ns generative-testing.core
  (:require [clojure.test.check :as tc]
            [clojure.test.check.generators :as gen]
            [clojure.test.check.properties :as prop]))
```

I think nowadays we would use spec for it.

> We are looking for *invariants* – properties that are always true.
> \[…\] mathematical laws, relationships between inputs and outputs,
> round-trip or complementing functions, and comparing action effects.
>
> Properties like identity, associativity, commutativity and idempotency
> are an excellent place to start.

Invariants are important because they reduce the number of case your
code must consider.

## Thinking in Clojure

-   Make Reasoned Choices: always compare trade-off of solutions
    (benefits and costs). *Think first, then do*. Careful treatment of
    decisions and weighed trade-off to fully understand the
    consequences.

-   Be Reasonable: code with clearly expressed intent, limited side
    effects, neatly separated concerns, and unambiguous naming. Simple.

-   Keep It Simple: Keep distinct concern as distinct as possible and
    avoid entangling concepts with other concepts.

    The code can be reasoned about, test and implemented without any
    incidental complexity.

    Entities are simplest when distinct and composable.

    Domain functions avoid complexity by avoiding side effects and
    concerning themselves only with entities in their domain.

-   Build Just Enough: Keep complexity at bay and avoid overengineering.

-   Compose: compose component, and evaluate your code composability by
    using it from another component.

    Results will be a set of tidy interfaces to distinct independent
    subsystems with clear communication channels. With a stable
    interface, a component can grow easily and adapt quickly.

-   Be Precise: avoid ambiguity and communicate clearly with others and
    your future self. Entities typify one concept. Functions effect a
    single transformation. Queries ask simple questions and return
    unambiguous results.

-   Use What Works: look for working libraries, solution in other
    languages or papers.

## Link

-   [Clojure
    Applied](https://pragprog.com/book/vmclojeco/clojure-applied)

-   tags :: [clj](./id:9336fa0f-85f3-4943-b374-6ca2f01ee0f8)
    [core-async](./id:843bd7e1-7106-4c45-ba46-fd2691b349b6)
    [design](./id:f65785b4-b6c7-48bf-b53f-046512a74952)

## See also (generated)

-   [Clojure](./../decks/clojure.md)
-   [Design](./20200430190921-design.md)
